The Secret Lives of Numbers
By Golan Levin, Jonathan Feinberg, and Shelly Wynecoop.
http://www.turbulence.org/Works/nums/

OVERVIEW

The authors conducted an exhaustive empirical study, with the aid of custom software, public search engines and powerful statistical techniques, in order to determine the relative popularity of every integer between 0 and one million. The resulting information exhibits an extraordinary variety of patterns which reflect and refract our culture, our minds, and our bodies.

For example, certain numbers, such as 212, 486, 911, 1040, 1492, 1789, 68040, or 90210, occur more frequently than their neighbors because they are used to denominate the phone numbers, tax forms, computer chips, famous dates, or television programs that figure prominently in our culture. Regular periodicities in the data, located at multiples and powers of ten, mirror our cognitive preference for round numbers in our biologically-driven base-10 numbering system. Certain numbers, such as 12345 or 8888, appear to be more popular simply because they are easier to remember.

Humanity’s fascination with numbers is ancient and complex. Our present relationship with numbers reveals both a highly developed tool and a highly developed user, working together to measure, create, and predict both ourselves and the world around us. But like every symbiotic couple, the tool we would like to believe is separate from us (and thus objective) is actually an intricate reflection of our thoughts, interests, and capabilities. One intriguing result of this symbiosis is that the numeric system we use to describe patterns, is actually used in a patterned fashion to describe. 

We surmise that our dataset is a numeric snaphot of the collective consciousness. Herein we return our analyses to the public in the form of an interactive visualization, whose aim is to provoke awareness of one's own numeric manifestations.


INTRODUCTION

When we choose to say there are "a lot" of gorillas, or "17 gorillas," or "around 20," we are making a choice based on our interests and abilities. Those interests and abilities are systematically expressed in the numbers we choose to send out into the world. The Internet provides us with a large and diverse database of the stuff people have sent out into the world, and it naturally includes large numbers of numbers. Since 1997, we have collected at intervals a novel set of data on the popularity of numbers: by performing a massive automated Internet search on each of the integers from 0 to 1000000 and counting the number of pages which contained each, we have obtained a picture of the Internet community's numeric interests and inclinations. Our interactive visualization attempts to make some of the more striking trends visible. Our data can be explored point by point, or viewed in larger sets, and may lend some insight into the cognitive structure of numeracy, culture, and memory. 

Certain patterns are made readily visible in the data browser, such as people's preference for multiples of 10, or reduplicative numbers such as 1010, 1111, 1212, etc. Further highlights in the data reveal more fleeting reflections of our activities: bright spots such as those for 80486 and 68040 reveal our interest not only in technology, but tell us about the state of that technology at the time. Other points indicate our interest, or lack of interest, in history. And popular culture inevitably makes its presence felt as well. Although we like to think of the use of numbers as objective and removed from our personal lives, it appears they also display elements of  our "numeracy". The denizens of the number line are not the mere automatons or corporate tools we have made them out to be: each has a personality, talents, communities, and sometimes a little "je ne sais quois". They reflect us. This unusual reflection is the focus of this project. 


NUMBERS ARE TOOLS

In learning how to abstract, we learn that all information is potentially expressible in numbers. The ability to abstract from perceived phenomenon (such as a group of cows, or the effects of gravity) to descriptions of the physical world (such as 23 or 9.8s^2) has allowed us to see commonalities in phenomena that may first have appeared to be distinct. 

One consequence of abstraction is that we must ignore the individual characteristics of the entities we abstract. As a result, the numbers we use to codify these abstractions must also lack character. Twenty-three cows may be better (or worse) than three cows, but "23" is not better than "3." Both numbers are simply descriptors, which inherit their meaning solely from taking part in fixed systems of fixed relations with other numbers. Apart from the existence of the numeric system (and the numbers' participation in it) individual numbers have no meaning.

Thus, our number system is seen as an objective tool—a tool that does not reflect human preference, emotion, or inconsistency. As such it is a tool used not to express ourselves, but is reserved only to describe the world around us. We do not write poetry with numbers, nor do we express our personal doubts or prejudices through them ...except as our humanity is projected onto the emotionless toil of mathematical proof, ledger balances, or pedagogical exercises. But like every symbiotic couple, the tool we would like to believe is separate from us (and thus objective) actually provides an intricate reflection of our thoughts, interests, and capabilities. One intriguing result of this symbiosis is that the numeric system we use to describe patterns, is actually used in a patterned fashion to describe.

We are imperfect users of our perfect tool. Buildings often skip the 13th floor, there is no year 0, and our only contact with very large numbers comes from government debt, and remain unreal to us for their very size. We spend most of our time using numbers not for calculating, or even measuring, but in acts of remembering, guessing, and simplifying. The secret lives of numbers presented here, deals less with the apparently inviolate laws we have contrived for the staid little number, than with our own natures expressed through their quixotic use. This secret life tells us not only about the number system we have fashioned, but also about our cognitive, professional, and creative liaisons with the various inhabitants of the number line. 


THE DATA ITSELF

The characteristics of the data we describe below include aspects of the population as a whole, patterns of smaller groups, and individual charm. All tell us something about our culture as expressed through numbers. 

The first and most striking characteristic of the data is the overall distribution of the numbers' occurrences. Instead of the uniform distribution one might expect if every number were equally useful, we see an exponential drop-off in popularity beginning with the number 1. These earliest, and most popular individuals aren't a glamorous set, but instead see their popularity rise from their accessibility. They are the first numbers we learn, and are the easiest to understand and use. For these reasons, with every increase in magnitude along the number line, the numbers see a sharp drop in this kind of basic popularity. 

There are, however, certain numbers further down the line that enjoy great popularity in spite of their greater number of digits. These numbers comprise some of the basic "royal families" of the number line: the base-2, base-10, base-12, and base-60 families. While most of these families have their niches in technology, time-based media and the English measurement system, the most prominent of these families is the one which clearly reflects our biology. The 10 family can be seen everywhere: numbers at multiples of 10, (and powers of ten, like 100, 1000, etc.) enjoy a popularity far greater than their neighbors throughout the data, revealing our profound inclination for "rounding".

Another important pattern points to a kind of temporal narcissism. We are most interested in the year in which we live, and are less interested in events in the past, regardless of their import. This suggests the possibility of measuring the longevity of our memory, or the degree to which we care about how  historical events may have shaped our present lives. In the slope of our curve between 1600 and 2003, we see an image of our cultural rate of forgetting.

In addition to these prominent families, some numbers are more popular because of their occupation. Here are just a few examples:

90-99, and 1990-2003 (no time like the present) 
90210 (the television show) 
68040, 68030, 68000 (Macintosh and Motorola) 
286, 386, 486, 8086, 80286, 80386, 80486 (Windows and Intel)
2,4,16,32,64,128,256,512,1024 (powers of 2, now RAM sizes) 
2400, 4800, 9600, 19200, 38400 (baud rates) 
8859 (from the ISO-8859 character set) 
1040, 1041 (Uncle Sam loves you)
10036, 26161, 13131, 77058 (American postal codes) 
800, 888, 877 (toll-free phone number prefixes) 
52062, 52064, 52066 (German postal codes)
98, 99 (why don't things ever just cost $1.00 even?) 


CONCLUSION

The numeric system has helped document the regularity and periodicity inherent in our environments and ourselves for millenia. In allowing us to examine our own patterns of use, we hope this data will be used to shed some light on our cultural biases and numeric capacities. We also hope to underscore the influence technology has had in changing the set of numbers we can and cannot imagine. 


REFERENCES

Benford, F. 1938. The law of anomalous numbers. Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society 78:551.

Boyle, J. 1994. An application of the Fourier series to the most significant digit problem. American Mathematical Monthly 101(November):879. 

Hill, T.P. 1998. The first digit phenomenon. American Scientist 86(July-August):358.

Newcomb, S. 1881. Note on the frequency of the use of digits in natural numbers. American Journal of Mathematics 4:39. 

Raimi, R.A. 1976. The first digit phenomenon. American Mathematical Monthly 83:521.



CREDITS

The Secret Lives of Numbers is a commission of New Radio and Performing Arts, Inc., for its Turbulence.org web site, and was developed with support from the Greenwall Foundation. 

Concept, direction, interface design & programming: Golan Levin
Interface and information design: Martin Wattenberg
Database & CGI programming (2002): Jonathan Feinberg
CGI programming (1997): David Becker
Statistics consulting: David Elashoff
Essay and research: Shelly Wynecoop
